Center for Academic Support  
THE COLLEGE STUDENT’S GUIDE TO WRITING  
FIVE TYPES OF ESSAYS  
(Information obtained from Successful College Writing  2nd ed. by Kathleen T. McWhorter) Of course! Please provide the passage you would like me to expand upon, and I will be happy to assist you.
 
Narrative essays serve as a distinct form of writing that intertwines storytelling with personal reflection. They allow the author to explore experiences and insights through a structured yet creative approach, often revealing deeper truths about the human condition. By employing a narrative framework, the writer engages the reader in a journey that transcends mere exposition, inviting them to contemplate the significance of the events recounted. This genre not only emphasizes the importance of individual perspective but also highlights the universal themes that resonate across diverse experiences. 
 
What is it?  
 A narrative essay achieves a certain purpose through telling a story, which makes it 
interesting to the reader and also results in getting some point across.  For example, you might write a story about meeting someone special to you.  The purpose may be to tell how meeting this person affected your decision to attend college or to entertain the reader with a funny story about that person.  The purposes of writing narratives include the following: to create a sense of shared history, to provide entertainment, to offer instruction, and to provide insight.  Some examples of narrative essay topics include a special person, event, or place.  After choosing a 
topic, you should determine the main point you want to make about that topic and then concentrate on that throughout the rest of the paper.    
Guidelines for writing a narrative essa y: 
 
4 Make a specific point.  Determine what the purpose of your essay is.  State that point in your 
thesis statement, or controlling idea, and build upon it throughout the essay by using 
examples, stories, and other details that all relate back to the main idea.  
4 Involve readers in the story and create a visual picture by using dialogue and physical 
description, which is achieved through telling events that happened and presenting problems that arose.  Also include specific descriptive details so that the reader can easily picture the scene in each of the events.   
4 Sequence events.  Often this is done chronologically (the order in which events happened), 
but using flashbacks (writing the story from one point in time but then talking briefly about 
something tha t happened in the past) and foreshadowing (briefly talking about something that 
will happen in the future) can make the story more interesting.   
4 Decide which point of view, first -person (from the author’s point of view, using “I”) or third -
person (using “ he,” “she,” “them,” etc. instead of “I”), works best for your essay, and tell the 
story from that viewpoint. 
  
Descriptive Essay  
 
What is it?  
  A descriptive essay tells about a certain topic or story, using details to appeal to the five 
senses.  It gives readers the ability to vividly imagine the situation or scene and feel as if they are 
experiencing it firsthand.  To write a descriptive essay, you could choose a person, place, event, object, or experience and describe it thoroughly using many sensory det ails. 
 Guidelines for writing a descriptive essay:  
 
4 Use sensory details.  Appeal to sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch.  
Center for Academic Support  
4 Use active verbs (in which the subject is doing the acting instead of being acted upon by 
something or someone else, such as “Cindy hit the ball.” instead of “The ball was hit by 
Cindy.”).  Also, use a variety of sentence types, such as a simple sentence (“Tom went to the store.”), compound sentence (“Tom went to the store, and he bought a loaf of bread.”), complex sentence (“While Tom was at the store, he bought a loaf of bread.”), or compound-complex sentence (“While Tom was at the store, he bought a loaf of bread, but he forgot to buy a gallon of milk.”). 
4 Avoid vague language, such as “pretty,” “really,” “a lot,” and “very.”  
4 Create a dominant impression (overall attitude, mood, or feeling about the subject), such as 
causing the readers to sympathize with you about a sad event that happened or to agree with you strongly on a certain controversial topic.  Choose the details and descripti ons that will 
help accomplish this impression. 
4 Use comparisons.  In order to help make the descriptions even more vivid to the reader, use 
similes (such as “His emotional state was like a roller coaster.”), metaphors (such as “Her smile was a ray of sunlig ht in the dark sea of unfamiliar faces.”), personification (giving 
human characteristics to an object, such as “The wind howled in my ears and beckoned me to walk further into the forest.”), and analogies (brief stories that relate to the topic).  Determine the method of organization that works best for your essay: spatial (top to bottom, inside to outside, near to far), chronological (the order in which events happened), least -to-most, or 
most -to-least.  
  
Comparison and/or Contrast Essay 
 
What is it?  
  A comparison and/or contrast essay tells about two or more main subjects by pointing out 
similarities and/or differences.  One way to write this type of essay would be to choose two or more objects, people, places, events, experiences, or ideas and compare and/or contrast them according to a few specific points.  
 Guidelines for writing a comparison and/or contrast essay:  
4 Have a clear purpose and a main point (to express ideas, to inform, to persuade, etc.).     
      Make sure your subjects have something spec ific on which you can base your    
      comparison and/or contrast. 
4 Decide the order that best suits your essay.  The two main ways you can choose to organize a 
comparison and/or contrast essay are point -by-point organization and subject -by-subject 
organi zation. 
  point -by-point:  switching back and forth between the subjects,   
                                      comparing/contrasting them according to several main points  
  subject -by-subject:  writing about all the main points of one subject and then  
             writing about all the main points of another subject, and so  
             on, referring back to the other subject(s) in a  
             comparing/contrasting way  
4 In your thesis statement, or controlling idea, include the subjects; identify w hether you    
     will be talking about similarities, differences, or both; and state your main point.  
4 Have a sufficient number of significant characteristics and details (which are the various 
points you use to compare and/or contrast the subjects), and give an equal amount to all 
Center for Academic Support  
sides.  
 
Cause and Effect Essay (also called causal analysis)  
 
What is it?  
  A cause and effect essay analyzes what causes certain things to happen or why things are 
a certain way, the results brought about by certain events, or both.  For example, you may want to write an essay about an event that happened and then tell how it affected your life.  This would tell the cause (the event) and the effect (how it affected your life).  To begin writing a cause and effect essay, you may want to first decide on a topic, such as an event or a person, and then 
decide what you will tell about that topic, such as what happened to make that specific event take place or what made the person have a certain attitude or personality.  You could also tell about a specific topic and what effects it had on future events.  Guidelines for writing a cause and effect essay:  
 
4 Decide whether you will focus on causes, effects, or both. 
4 There can be multiple causes of one effect.  (For example, because you saved your money, 
shopped around for the best deal, and saw an ad in a newspaper, you were able to buy the car 
of your dreams.) There can also be one cause of multiple effects.  (For example, your decision to stay out late one night may have caused you to miss  an important phone call, 
forget to study for a test, and made you tired the next day.)  There can also be a chain of events in which each effect turns out to be the cause of another effect. (For example, one event may have affected your decision to travel  to Europe, which affected your decision to 
study a foreign language, which helped you get a job as a travel agent.)  
4 Have a clear purpose (to tell information, to persuade readers, or both).  This purpose is 
achieved through a main idea, which should be included in the thesis statement, or controlling idea.  
4 Choose a logical organization.  For example, you may want to use chronological (the order in 
which events happened), most -to-least (such as most effective to least effective or most 
difficult to least difficult), least- to-most (such as least costly to most costly or least obvious 
to most obvious), or order of importance (such as a belief that is most important to you, then a belief that is a little less important, and so on).  
4 Explain cause and/or effect f ully, using details to support your explanations. 
 
 
Argumentative Essay  
What is it?  
  An argumentative essay makes a claim and then gives examples and evidence to prove 
that point.  You can begin writing an argumentative essay by deciding on a certain topic, such as 
something about a belief, idea, or controversial issue.  Then, do research to obtain detailed information.  The information can be statistics, stories, examples, observances, and other facts. Use the information throughout the essay to argue your point and convince the reader.    
 Guidelines for writing an argumentative essay:  
 
Center for Academic Support  
4 Choose a narrow issue.  
4 Tell your reader what you believe about the issue very clearly and specifically in your thesis 
statement, or controlling idea.  
4 Be aware of your aud ience and anticipate the reader’s views.  This means that if you know 
your readers will most likely not believe a certain statement because it goes against 
traditional beliefs or their personal viewpoints, make sure you give solid evidence to back it up. 
4 Use convincing details as evidence to support your claim.  These should be from believable 
and reliable sources.  For example, if you’re stating something that has to do with human health, quote a doctor who knows about that topic, or if you are talking abo ut a trend in 
society, include statistics from a well- known organization.  
4 Choose the most appropriate way of arguing your point (inductive or deductive). 
  inductive=start with stating all the evidence and then move on to one conclusion 
  deductive=start w ith one basic statement of belief and move on to the  
                    supporting points of evidence  
4 Acknowledge opposing viewpoints to prove you have thought about the topic thoroughly yet 
still find that your point is correct.  
  
Classification or Divi sion Essay  
 
What is it?  
  A classification or division essay presents several topics by organizing them in a clearly 
defined pattern.   
  A classification essay takes several topics that are related in some way and sorts them 
into groups or categories according to certain characteristics.  Some examples of this type of 
paper would be three objects, people, or places that are each described separately, but they are also categorized and presented in such a way so that the connection among them is clear to the  
reader.   
  A division essay begins with one topic and divides it out into several parts in order to 
take a closer, more detailed look at it.  To write a division essay, you could choose a topic about a person, place, object, or event and then divide it i nto several aspects that analyze the topic from 
different points.  Guidelines for writing a classification or division essay:  
 
4 Decide either how to classify the topics or into what parts to divide the topics,  
according to whatever works best for your audi ence and is both exclusive (meaning that it 
strictly allows only certain information into each category) and comprehensive (meaning that 
all information is included somewhere, in one category or another) so that no topics overlap or are left out.  
4 Make each  category clear and understandable to the reader by using descriptions of the 
categories and topics and by including details.  
4 Make sure the thesis statement, or controlling idea, tells what the main subject of the paper is; 
it may also mention the method y ou will use to classify or divide.  
  
